Creating Passive Model

CMRI (Database)
raw data/ dicoms from 7T bruker: Server
Copied to: Lab Mac- Desktop → FMRI_DATA~
Dropbox → PAH_Imaging_FEA → “FMRI_DATA”
CLI commands to copy from server to local machine, uploaded to GitHub

Sorted files (Sorted using Dicomsort)
Lab Mac- Desktop → FMRI_Sorted
OneDrive →  PAH_Imaging_FEA → “Sorted Dicoms”

Code: All code related to this are uploaded to the GitHub Repo
Concatenation (requires all slicer to be the same Z distance apart) if different (eg first 3 slicer are 1mm and rest are 1.5mm) resliced them to a consistent Z difference
Concatenation Code uploaded to GitHub
Input to this is the folder with sorted dicoms
output is a nrrd
nrrd→ open with notepad ++, change line 8 to reflect the right X, Y and Z spacing
example line: "space directions: none (0.352,0,0) (0,0.352,0) (0,0,1.5)"
To check the spacing of the slices → use this matlab code called "DicomHeaderInfo.m"
OneDrive→ PAH_Imaging_FEA → “All .nrrd files”

Meshing
3DSliceris used to segment
Open nrrd as "sequence"
All segmentations are extracted to a shared Dropbox folder (owned by KG): OneDrive→ PAH_Imaging_FEA → “Segmented STL files”
Meshmixeris used to clean the mesh and make the base flat
To remesh in meshmixer, make sure the 'Preserve Sharp Edges' option is on [sharp threshold can be pretty low ~7 to 10]
Meshlabis used to seperate surfaces (Base, LV epicardium, RV epicardium, endocardium) saved as 4 .stl files
Edge length around ~0.4
After selecting correct faces → mesh → separate selected faces to new mesh
These faces are imported into SALOME, stitched and a 3D tet mesh is generated (.med)
The .med is opened in GMSHand saved as a .msh file
SALOME: 

1. Open Salome & change salome to mesh (top bar)
2. Import all STL's (File → Import → STLs)
3. Build Compound Mesh
    1. Name it whatever (create new mesh NOT append)
    2. For meshes subgroup select all STL's holding down shift 
    3. Select Create groups from input objects 
    4. Select Merge coincident nodes and elements 
    5. Apply and close 
4. Should see new mesh 
5. Right click on mesh → edit mesh → under 3D do GMSH 3D → gmsh 3D parameters → Delaunay  max size -.4 → apply and close
6. NETGEN 3D → fineness = moderate 
7. Click on compute (Mesh → compute)
8. Groups of Nodes and groups of faces 
    1. change names of faces to base, epi, lv, rv (all lowercase)
    2. do not change names of nodes 
9. Right click on compound → create group → click on volume and select all → apply and close 
    1. Trying to create a volume group!!!! 
10. Before export → compute again to make sure there are tetrahedrons 
11. Right click → export → MED file 
    1. DO NOT automatically create groups 
12. Sanity check: gmsh → open .med 
    1. Look at statistics → geometry → confirm volumes should be 1 and phsycial groups should be 5 and 4 surfaces 
    2. Export as a .msh 
        1. Version 4 ASCII and click on save all elements 

Salome -- separating volume for different material properties

1. right click on compound → create new group → volume → enable manual addition 

FIBERS:
We use a rule based fiber generation tool
This is installed with Docker
Code is written in python
All code is uploaded to GitHub
A .txt file explains the setup and a few docker commands
Input to the code is the .msh file and fiber angles at LV and RV epi and endocardiums and at the walls of the septum
Output is paraview files to view the mesh and
a automatically generated .feb file (written in XML) that can be opened in febio
Running Fiber Generation:
Run Docker Desktop
Create a new folder with the rat name in the Docker_Mount/Meshes folder
Save the .msh file from the previous step in the new folder. name it *rat name*.msh (this should match the name of the folder)
Run "RunContainerkg.bat" in the Docker_Mount folder in Github
Open http://localhost:8888/
Open FiberCreation.ipynb
Change the ratname variable to the rat name (i.e name of the folder and .msh file)
Run the file
Two new files (a .h5 and .xdmf) named *rat name*_With_Fibers will be created in the Docker_Mount folder
Copy these two files (.h5 and .xdmf) to the Volume_Meshes folder in github

Zero Load State + Passive Filling (Shaikh’s code that uses Gibbon)
Open the matlab script "Trial4_UseXDMF_Volume.m" in the ZeroLoadState_InverseFEA folder
Change the ratname variable (should match the volume mesh)
Change the materialScale variable to 50 (will be changed later)
Change the material parameter. This includes the a, b, a0....k parameters.
Change the Pressure_LVRV parameter as [LV RV]
The material parameters and pressures can be found in the cMR_Tracer.xlsx file
Run the Matlab script
The final Febio files will be stored in a new folder with the rat name (automatically created) in the ZeroLoadState_InverseFEA/FeBio folder
You can use the Febio files to extract additional parameters

END


FEBio
The simulations are run in FEBio
Open the .feb file generated during fiber creation.
Add material properties
Add loads (pressures in RV and LV)

Holzapfel-Ogden Material Properties 
This is included in FEBio as an addon- the addon is compiled and uploaded to the GitHub repo
RV Model Parameters are listed here for every animal 
RV Model fitting code is here (turns parameters into FEBio XML format) - To be linked to GitHub

Septum Model Parameters are listed here for every animal
Septum Model fitting code ishere 

Cobiveco
To be used to compare results between animals (using pacellation or the AHA view)
To be used to combine DTI fibers and rule based fibers; and transfer fibers from one animal to the next
Tasks for Cobiveco: 

    1. Understand Parcellation 
        1. Example codes: geo1, geo2, mapping, parcellation 
    2. Given stress from FE Bio → can you run parcellation and know what the stress is in every segment of parcellation 

Purpose is to divide the heart into one understood division so we can compare between different hearts!! 

    1. After Understanding Parcellation: 


Running Geo2 code with our own volume mesh: 

* Volume mesh is in .vtu format
    * Volume mesh Protocol: 
        * Used Salome to get a .med file (only volume was exported)
        * Used gmsh to get a .msh file 
        * From gmsh can export .vtk file 
        * Import vtk file into paraview then 
            * file → save data → *.vtu → data mode = ASCII → ok
            * IMPORTANT TO NOTE: MUST EDIT THE .VTU FILE SO THAT ONLY TETAHEDRONS ARE THERE
            * Use the "Extract Cells By Type" Filter (if applicable)
                * Some VTU files might have clearly defined cell types that differentiate volume elements from surfaces. If this is the case, the Extract Cells By Type filter can be very useful to explicitly select only 3D cells.
* 4 surfaces required in .ply format (got this from meshlab when I separated the surface meshes)
    * Epidcardium
    * LV endocardium 
    * RV endocardium 
    * Base plane
* Put volume mesh and surface meshes into one folder and ensure all of the headings of the files are the same. Change the input and output prefix in the code and then press run. Note: none of the other code needs to be changed 

Running the parcellation code

* Run “example_parcellation.m” exactly how is. Make sure that the paths are defined correctly! 

Goal: Map FE Effective Stress Data onto the parcellations

1. Export stress from FEBio
    1. When viewing the color map values are as follows: effective stress, yes, jet, yes, 10, no, user, 1, user, 0, no 
    2. In Post (left side panel) select “stress” and export → write all states
2. Need to convert this stress to effective stress
    1. Right now I am using Von Mises Stress: 
        1. Used this equation to convert stress to “effective stress”:


1. Want to map effective stress values from our .csv file onto the parcellation regions from Cobiveco (stored as a .vtu file)
    1. Note: our Cobiveco .vtu parcellation file stores under <PointData> NOT <CellData>
        1. Region labels are at Node Level 
        2. Effective stress is at element level
            1. Need to map these two: 
                1. can assign each element a parcellation OR 
                2. average element stresses for nodes and compute regional means
2. Steps to map effective stress values to our parcellation regions 
    1. resultWithPar_geo2_ascii.vtu → parcellation
    2. geometry_result_mesh_ascii.vtu → point/elements for stress mapping [Note: this is result from geo2 turned into ascii format]
    3. effective_stress.csv → element based stressed values over 10 time steps (used Von Mises to get this)
    4. cobiveco_stress_region_stats.csv → computed averages per region and time step 



1. Export Stress from FEBio 
2. Run “compute_effective_stress.m”
    1. compute_effective_stress('Y325_stress_export.csv','Y325effectivestress.csv')
3. 

Goal: Integrate DTI data into Cobiveco
Example codes: geo1, geo2, mapping
(Need to understand mapping and then add code to this)

GitHub

* inside the github folder in my files right click → show more options → git bash 



* git add .
* git commit -m 'whatever comment I want - description of what I have changed'
* git push 
* git pull to get everything


Docker: localhost:8888


Mapping DTI (.mat files from Utah) onto the Cobiveco locations of the segmentation 

1. Inputs: DTI source file, target cobiveco parcellation vtu
2. Output: Parcellation vtu with DTI fibers



To make sure the FEBio Studio material property is set up correctly: 

1. Windows (C:) → program files → FEBioStudio → bin → 

Separating myocardium!!:

1. Input xdmf to paraview (reader T)
2. Open and then click apply 
3. click f and select cells through and highlight area 
4. can grow and shrink selection 
5. click on f and shift and select andc we can remove parts 
6. filters → extract selection 
7. copy active selection 
8. hit apply 
9. Edit → find data (v) and invert selection to save lv and rv walls
10. Use freeze to extract Cell IDs

filters → extract selection and copy active selection 
paste in notebad and get rid of top header 
paste into excel and the third column is what we need 
We will make one for RV, LV, Septum 
ctrl+A selects all data 







